= Changelog

Per-release changes to Geocoder.

== 1.0.4 (2011 Sep 18)

* Remove klass method from rake task, which could conflict with app methods (thanks github.com/mguterl).

== 1.0.3 (2011 Sep 17)

* Add support for Google Premier geocoding service (thanks github.com/steveh).
* Update Google API URL (thanks github.com/soorajb).
* Allow rescue from timeout with FreeGeoIP (thanks github.com/lukeledet).
* Fix: rake assets:precompile (Rails 3.1) not working in some situations.
* Fix: stop double-adjusting units when using kilometers (thanks github.com/hairyheron).

== 1.0.2 (2011 June 25)

* Add support for MongoMapper (thanks github.com/spagalloco).
* Fix: user-specified coordinates field wasn't working with Mongoid (thanks github.com/thisduck).
* Fix: invalid location given to near scope was returning all results (Active Record) or error (Mongoid) (thanks github.com/ogennadi).

== 1.0.1 (2011 May 17)

* Add option to not rescue from certain exceptions (thanks github.com/ahmedrb).
* Fix STI child/parent geocoding bug (thanks github.com/ogennadi).
* Other bugfixes.

== 1.0.0 (2011 May 9)

* Add command line interface.
* Add support for local proxy (thanks github.com/Olivier).
* Add support for Yandex.ru geocoding service.
* Add support for Bing geocoding service (thanks github.com/astevens).
* Fix single table inheritance bug (reported by github.com/enrico).
* Fix bug when Google result supplies no city (thanks github.com/jkeen).

== 0.9.13 (2011 Apr 11)

* Fix "can't find special index: 2d" error when using Mongoid with Ruby 1.8.

== 0.9.12 (2011 Apr 6)

* Add support for Mongoid.
* Add bearing_to/from methods to geocoded objects.
* Improve SQLite's distance calculation heuristic.
* Fix: Geocoder::Calculations.geographic_center was modifying its argument in-place (reported by github.com/joelmats).
* Fix: sort 'near' query results by distance when using SQLite.
* Clean up input: search for coordinates as a string with space after comma yields zero results from Google. Now we get rid of any such space before sending the query.
* DEPRECATION: Geocoder.near should not take <tt>:limit</tt> or <tt>:offset</tt> options.
* DEPRECATION: Change argument format of all methods that take lat/lon as separate arguments. Now you must pass the coordinates as an array [lat,lon], but you may alternatively pass a address string (will look up coordinates) or a geocoded object (or any object that implements a to_coordinates method which returns a [lat,lon] array).

== 0.9.11 (2011 Mar 25)

* Add support for result caching.
* Add support for Geocoder.ca geocoding service.
* Add +bearing+ attribute to objects returned by geo-aware queries (thanks github.com/matellis).
* Add config setting: language.
* Add config settings: +use_https+, +google_api_key+ (thanks github.com/svesely).
* DEPRECATION: <tt>Geocoder.search</tt> now returns an array instead of a single result.
* DEPRECATION: <tt>obj.nearbys</tt> second argument is now an options hash (instead of units). Please change <tt>obj.nearbys(20, :km)</tt> to: <tt>obj.nearbys(20, :units => :km)</tt>.

== 0.9.10 (2011 Mar 9)

* Fix broken scopes (github.com/mikepinde).
* Fix broken Ruby 1.9 and JRuby compatibility (don't require json gem).

== 0.9.9 (2011 Mar 9)

* Add support for IP address geocoding via FreeGeoIp.net.
* Add support for Yahoo PlaceFinder geocoding API.
* Add support for custom geocoder data handling by passing a block to geocoded_by or reverse_geocoded_by.
* Add <tt>Rack::Request#location</tt> method for geocoding user's IP address.
* Change gem name to geocoder (no more rails-geocoder).
* Gem now works outside of Rails.
* DEPRECATION: +fetch_coordinates+ no longer takes an argument.
* DEPRECATION: +fetch_address+ no longer takes an argument.
* DEPRECATION: <tt>Geocoder.search</tt> now returns a single result instead of an array.
* DEPRECATION: <tt>fetch_coordinates!</tt> has been superceded by +geocode+ (then save your object manually).
* DEPRECATION: <tt>fetch_address!</tt> has been superceded by +reverse_geocode+ (then save your object manually).
* Fix: don't die when trying to get coordinates with a nil address (github.com/zmack).

== 0.9.8 (2011 Feb 8)

* Include <tt>geocode:all</tt> Rake task in gem (was missing!).
* Add <tt>Geocoder.search</tt> for access to Google's full response.
* Add ability to configure Google connection timeout.
* Emit warnings on Google connection problems and errors.
* Refactor: insert Geocoder into ActiveRecord via Railtie.

== 0.9.7 (2011 Feb 1)

* Add reverse geocoding (+reverse_geocoded_by+).
* Prevent exception (uninitialized constant Geocoder::Net) when net/http not already required (github.com/sleepycat).
* Refactor: split monolithic Geocoder module into several smaller ones.

== 0.9.6 (2011 Jan 19)

* Fix incompatibility with will_paginate gem.
* Include table names in GROUP BY clause of nearby scope to avoid ambiguity in joins (github.com/matchu).

== 0.9.5 (2010 Oct 15)

* Fix broken PostgreSQL compatibility (now 100% compatible).
* Switch from Google's XML to JSON geocoding API.
* Separate Rails 2 and Rails 3-compatible branches.
* Don't allow :conditions hash in 'options' argument to 'nearbys' method (was deprecated in 0.9.3).

== 0.9.4 (2010 Aug 2)

* Google Maps API key no longer required (uses geocoder v3).

== 0.9.3 (2010 Aug 2)

* Fix incompatibility with Rails 3 RC 1.
* Deprecate 'options' argument to 'nearbys' method.
* Allow inclusion of 'nearbys' in Arel method chains.

== 0.9.2 (2010 Jun 3)

* Fix LIMIT clause bug in PostgreSQL (reported by github.com/kenzie).

== 0.9.1 (2010 May 4)

* Use scope instead of named_scope in Rails 3.

== 0.9.0 (2010 Apr 2)

* Fix bug in PostgreSQL support (caused "PGError: ERROR:  column "distance" does not exist"), reported by github.com/developish.

== 0.8.9 (2010 Feb 11)

* Add Rails 3 compatibility.
* Avoid querying Google when query would be an empty string.

== 0.8.8 (2009 Dec 7)

* Automatically select a less accurate but compatible distance algorithm when SQLite database detected (fixes SQLite incompatibility).

== 0.8.7 (2009 Nov 4)

* Added Geocoder.geographic_center method.
* Replaced _get_coordinates class method with read_coordinates instance method.

== 0.8.6 (2009 Oct 27)

* The fetch_coordinates method now assigns coordinates to attributes (behaves like fetch_coordinates! used to) and fetch_coordinates! both assigns and saves the attributes.
* Added geocode:all rake task.

== 0.8.5 (2009 Oct 26)

* Avoid calling deprecated method from within Geocoder itself.

== 0.8.4 (2009 Oct 23)

* Deprecate <tt>find_near</tt> class method in favor of +near+ named scope.

== 0.8.3 (2009 Oct 23)

* Update Google URL query string parameter to reflect recent changes in Google's API.

== 0.8.2 (2009 Oct 12)

* Allow a model's geocoder search string method to be something other than an ActiveRecord attribute.
* Clean up documentation.

== 0.8.1 (2009 Oct 8)

* Extract XML-fetching code from <tt>Geocoder.search</tt> and place in Geocoder._fetch_xml (for ease of mocking).
* Add tests for coordinate-fetching instance methods.

== 0.8.0 (2009 Oct 1)

First release.
